---
title: "Groups"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
---

::: questions

- How can I organize the projects of my (research) group and my collaborations?

:::

::: objectives

- Create a group.
- Move a project.
- Add a member to a group.
- Explain how the members of a group relate to its subgroups and projects.
- Delete a group.

:::

In the first episode, we already got to know groups; GitLab’s way to organize
projects. A group might hold a projects of a research group or those of a
research project with contributors from multiple institutions.

In this episode we will create (and delete) a group, move our project, and learn
how members of a group relate to its subgroups and projects.

## Creating a Group

In the top menu bar, we open the drop-down menu labeled with a boxed plus and
select the menu item “New Group”. On the next page, we select “Create group”,
because that is what we want to do.

This leads to the following page:

![Create form dialog](fig/create-group.png){alt="Create group form with text
input fields labeled “Group name”, “Group URL”, a radio button element labeled
"Visibility Level” with options “Private” and “Public”, a drop-down field
labeled “Role”, a radio button element labeled “Who will be using this group?”
with options “My company or team” and “Just me”, a drop-down field labeled “What
will you use this group for?” and an text input field labeled “Email 1” with a
button to add more under the heading “Invite members (optional)”."}

Choose any name for the group, for example a fictional research group like
“Ant-Sized Elephants’ Applications Lab”. When you move the focus out of the
input field, for example by pressing the tabulator key, GitLab will suggest a
URL for the group. Usually, we might want to adapt it, but for now all we care
about that it is available.

You can leave the group’s visibility private. The visibility of a group works
like that of a project.

We will leave the remaining fields as they are and create the group by clicking
the blue button labeled “Create group”. GitLab will navigate to the group home
page, listing the group’s subgroups and projects (currently none).
